[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Jeremy, a very warm welcome.
Thank you so much
for joining us today.
>> Thank you.
It's great to be here.
>> For our Australian audience,
you're probably most celebrated
as one of the best Australian
didgeridoo players.
Now, when we were
outside, we were
talking about how
busy you've been
this year-- over 200
airplanes you've taken so far
and the many stages
that you've spoken on.
And life today is very
different to what it used to be.
And I was wondering
if you could start
by sharing with
us what life used
to be in comparison to now.
>> Yeah.
Well, I think life is
definitely a journey.
I don't think I
sort of know that.
And it's a fairly
individual journey as well.
We obviously have influences
that come in and shape,
or mold, or sort of try and
turn us into different things
or whatnot.
But it is a journey.
And I think I like to look
at my life a bit like a book.
It's got many chapters.
And some of them are really
tough to read and painful.
And others are incredible.
My late grandfather-- he was the
person who really first tabled
that notion of like, look at
your life like it's a book.
And he kind of
confused me a bit,
because I knew that old man
had never probably read a book.
Because he could barely read.
I remember reading
the newspaper to him.
And so I was--
I really pondered that.
Well, how do you
know what a book
is if you've never read it?
But my grandfather
said that there
are going to be chapters in
your story that you don't like.
But if you tear chapters out of
a book, all the pages around it
start to fall out.
And before you know it, there's
no story or no book left,
just a spine or an empty cover.
And so it has been a journey,
one that I certainly--
I love.
And I think a majority
part of the journey
started not too far from here on
the northern beaches of Sydney
and growing up in a fairly,
sort of in a normal world.
And as a young, young
kid, you don't really
see anything that's not normal.
Or you don't have maybe
the intellectual ability
to have the conversation about
how a family is different,
or why they're
different, or whatnot.
And so it was fairly
apparent that life
was sort of normal for
me as a kid growing up.
But I certainly have memories
of being a bit raised here
and being with mom
and my sisters.
And we went to Wingham mall.
And mom would stop
and talk to someone.
And they'd say, are
these your daughters?
And mom would say, yeah.
And then people would ask,
well, who is this boy?
Mom is a beautiful white lady.
My sisters are
beautiful white girls.
And I have sort of a
different background to them.
And I always sort of
looked like the next door
neighbor on holidays
with mom and my sisters.
But you don't think of
anything differently.
As a kid, I know that
I had an affinity,
sort of at Manly Public School.
There were a few Pacific
Island families--
Samoan, Tongan, Maori.
Because I always had an affinity
with that island culture.
It felt very good for me
that my best friends were
Pacific Islanders growing up.
I played rugby in a predominant
Pacific Island team.
And by the time I was
12, I basically moved
from mom's and was living in
with the best friend's family,
with their mom.
Their mom was Samoan.
That Maori.
And so it was the culture
that really shaped me.
Because I was in sort of
deep searching and trying
to understand who I was.
Where do I come from?
And there was sort
of a lot of mystery
around that and
something that was sort
of not hidden, but just sort
of not really spoken about.
And on the Northern
Beaches in the '80s,
there weren't a lot of
Aboriginal families.
I certainly don't
have any memory
of meeting an Aboriginal person
as a young boy growing up.
And so when I found
out the identity of who
my biological father was--
and it was pretty challenging
for me.
Because I was confronted
with the stereotypes.
And I remember being part
of the playground jokes.
And all of a sudden,
well, those jokes were me.
And I became pretty
confused and pretty lost.
And I realized an identity
that I was searching for,
like I just--
I had no answers to.
>> Did you go through
bullying at school?
>> No.
I was always a big kid.
I was always a popular kid.
I was good at sport,
not good at school.
I don't remember
ever being bullied.
But I certainly know that I
was probably a bully at times.
It's my-- in the last couple
of weeks, I've reflected on it.
But this is something I've
known for a long time,
is that bullying has been one of
those things that probably got
me in the most trouble
as a young person,
because I hated it so much.
From a very young age, defending
those that were getting bullied
was always what I wanted to
do, that I hated seeing it.
It infuriated me, in fact.
One of-- I remember being in
grade eight in high school
just up the road.
And there was a young
boy that had grown up
in the housing commission, down
near the Manly swimming pools.
And I'd never spoken to him,
but he was a younger boy
that I'd seen.
I knew where he lived.
And we arrived down at Manly
Wharf at the bus stops.
And as I got off the
bus, it was early.
And he was being bullied
by a couple of boys
from the college, up
the hill at St. Pauls.
I instantly-- like I
lost my mind over that
and attacked those two boys.
And then a gentleman
stopped the car.
And I attacked him as well.
And this young boy--
he was fine.
And I took him on the bus.
But I remember getting on
the bus to go to school.
And everyone was dead quiet.
No one looked at me.
No one talked at me and
then sitting in period one.
And the police came.
And I was arrested
in the classroom
and walked across the school.
But you sort of got a hero
status for that sort of thing,
like being arrested.
But the fact is that people
missed the narrative.
I was protecting someone
from being bullied.
But in doing so, I
became the bully, right?
Which is something that has
happened a lot through life.
I hate-- I really-- it hurts
me when I see people being
disempowered by someone else.
I was a good football--
I was a good sportsperson,
a really good artist,
a good musician.
I'm all self-taught.
But music and art
were two of the things
that I sort of was
probably forbidden from,
sort of in thriving at school.
Because geez, I haven't
found the answer to this yet.
But I don't know why
year seven music teachers
think it's appropriate
to teach a recorder.
Because it's the dumbest
instrument in the world,
that we're restless
little boys, right?
We need drums.
We need to make noise.
And I knew instantly
that if I blew
the recorder as hard as I could,
it would piss the teacher off.
And I would get
sent out of class.
And I could go back to
kicking the football.
But the reality was like in
reflection of those times,
is I just wanted to be seen,
like I was desperate for it.
>> So, Jeremy, can you share
with our audience to give them
a little bit of context, the
sort of struggles that you went
through as a child into
your teenage years?
Because it wasn't always
easy by any means.
And I just want to
share with our audience
the sort of things that
you've had to endure.
>> Yeah.
I think it really--
the majority struggle
started as a teenager,
like so many people do.
But once you become a teenager,
you become more aware, right?
And you're seeing
things beyond just sort
of what lives inside the home
or what lives inside the family.
And it was at that
time that I found out
I was, in fact,
Aboriginal and probably
the foundations
of all my identity
that had sort of shaped
my life until 13.
You sort of were just taken
away, almost in an instant.
And so this place of
trying to understand.
Well, what does that mean?
Because looking around on
the Northern Beaches is,
you don't see Aboriginal people.
I don't have any memory of
meeting an Aboriginal person.
And so you get told.
You find the truth.
And it was pretty challenging,
because of those stereotypes
that I'd heard,
the conversations,
the derogatory comments.
And I'd been part of them.
And all of a
sudden, that was me.
And it was really painful
trying to work that out.
And it wasn't long.
I think 13 was--
probably just shy
of 13 that when
you start experimenting
with drugs and alcohol.
And you start looking
for your tribe as a kid.
Where do I fit in?
And football was the place
where I got the most praise.
It was sort of that
place that I got seen.
And then everything else wasn't.
And sort of down at
Manly as a young boy,
that was a billiards hall.
And that was sort of
where we formed our tribe.
And call it a gang.
Call it a tribe,
whatever it was.
But there was a tight knit,
sort of group of young people
that were all going
through similar struggles.
And so you found your tribe
of totally different stories,
but there was an understanding
of what was going on.
But in that place as
well is that we didn't
have the leadership or the
mentorship to talk to us about,
how do we address the pain?
And so therefore,
you self-medicate
with drugs and alcohol
without the wisdom
to know that that's
just suppressing.
And it's not taking
away or not healing it,
but it's just suppressing.
Or it gives it
permission to come out.
And what I realized was that
my behavior was becoming more
and more volatile, and
angry, aggressive, upset,
and confused, lost, hurt.
I remember being--
I think my first arrest
was for graffiti.
It was for-- and the thing
with this first arrest
was probably the catalyst
for my hatred towards police.
Because I was arrested for
not doing anything wrong.
We were walking
to Kangaroo Rock.
It was pretty popular for young
people in the Northern Beaches.
Silverchair were playing
there that night.
And me and two Pacific Island
boys were walking up the hill.
This was in the peak of summer.
And two police officers
stopped the three
of us walking up the hill.
And I was charged with
graffiti, because I had graffiti
drawn on my backpack.
And then I was
arrested, taken to--
and then the statement
came through that
the reason why
the police stopped
us was because we were
drinking alcohol in the street.
And none of us were
drinking alcohol.
None of us had taken any drugs.
None of us were smoking.
Us three boys were completely
just walking up the hill,
going to the concert.
And the police were horrible.
They treated us disgracefully.
And I remember at one
point, a young fella
called Eddie Lay-- he saw us
being harassed by this police.
And he came over.
And he was of Filipino descent.
And the copper said, how about
you mind your own business?
Otherwise, you're
going to find yourself
in the same place as
your other black mates.
>> So you found it was a very
racial attack at the time?
>> It was completely
racially motivated--
that arrest was.
And the statement that they put
through that I was charged with
was just full of lies.
And the disbelief.
So I went home.
And I pleaded--
I always like to mom.
And they didn't-- no
one believed me, really,
that they thought that
police not like that.
You have to be doing something
wrong, otherwise they--
because inherently, you
don't understand racism
until you feel it every day.
You're targeted, the
prejudice and whatnot.
And I went before the courts.
And it was really at that
time, sitting in the jury--
children's court over in Glebe.
It was just before my hearing.
And I sat down on
the toilet, just
sat down to take a few breaths.
I was pretty nervous
about being in there.
And I looked at the door.
And there was an Aboriginal
flag drawn, graffitied
on the back of the door.
And I said, well, Aboriginal
people have been here.
And it was pretty
much from that period
that I spent far more
time in courtrooms
than I did in classrooms.
>> So life continued to
spiral out of control?
>> Yeah, because
from that incident,
I'd been arrested for doing
something, doing nothing wrong.
I hated police.
I hated them with just such
anger, and hatred, and fear,
because of how we were treated.
And the no trust
still exists today.
Even through success
and everything,
I sort of feel
uncomfortable around police.
Because I just don't trust
them, still from this day.
>> So what would you have
described as the lowest point
of your life?
What was happening
around you at that time?
Were you still living at home?
>> Yeah.
No, I was staying with
friends all the time,
just wherever I could stay
where we had free rein.
Discipline was not something
that I coped very well with.
And being told what
to do wasn't something
that I coped very well with.
And I was just--
I knew at home, like
with mom and my sisters,
it was a different
world, all of a sudden.
The love didn't change.
Anything.
But it was just
different for me.
And they couldn't understand it.
And I found that,
sort of the tribe
that I was searching
for, down in Manly.
And ultimately, that
came with trouble, too.
Because young kids with too
much time and no discipline--
you get in trouble.
And the older boys
teach us how to--
their mentorship was based
around probably the best
intention, but it sort of
led us down the wrong way.
And sort of the theft started.
The violence sort of
more and more as I
became-- so more and
more times in court.
And then there
became a yearning,
that I realized every
time I went to court,
I met Aboriginal people.
And so there was this place
in me that said, well,
if I want to find my identity,
I've got to go to court
or I've got to go to jail.
And that's what it was, sort
of the pathway to prison
as a young boy,
as so incarcerated
in multiple correction centers
around New South Wales.
And it's one of the blemishes
that this nation has,
that we are-- as
Aboriginal people,
we're 3% of the
total population,
yet make up 70-plus percent
of the population in juvenile
correction centers,
that there is--
something needs to be done.
And police in prison
is not supporting this.
But this yearning to
want to know my culture,
want to know who I am
sort of really came.
And I started defining my
Aboriginality or my identity
based on going to prison and
defining it by the crimes
that I would commit or whatnot.
>> So what was the turning
point in that case?
Because your life is
very, very different now.
And so from in and out of
jail, and too many drugs,
drink, and all the
rest of it, what
was the catalyst to
your turning point?
>> So there was a major
incident that happened.
I think it was '93,
'94, New Year's Eve.
I was sitting down
at Manly Beach.
And I was sitting with one
of the older boys, Matt,
who really mentored us.
And he had an
identical twin brother.
And he really was the one
who nurtured my artwork.
And I really took care of--
taught me how to spray paint as
murals and not just vandalism.
Not just work, but create
murals and create art.
And he had an identical
twin brother who'd been up,
the other end of the corso.
And had got into an
altercation, I believe,
with some Pacific Island
boys that had come across
from Western Sydney.
And it dispersed.
And the night went on.
And the boys kept drinking
as they walked up the corso.
And by the time they
got to the beach end,
they saw all of us sitting down.
And they saw Matt,
thinking it was Dave
that they'd had the fight with.
And before we knew it,
someone smashed a bottle
and stabbed Matt.
And that was it.
At 14, when you watch
someone bleed to death,
it never leaves you.
Like it-- no human should
have to see it, be part of it.
And it haunts you forever.
And that was one of the
catalysts for change.
Because at that point,
you cried so many tears,
that you decided you're
never going to cry again.
And you lost empathy and
compassion for the world.
And so the bad behavior
became more and more volatile.
The circuit breaker for
me was a beautiful lady
called Pauline Dickson, an
Aboriginal liaison officer,
who was the first
person that ever tabled
a conversation with me, that
your identity will never
be found in prison.
And she spoke to me in a way
that no one else spoke to me.
She spoke to me in a way
that was so nurturing.
And she spoke to me in
a way that said that--
she taught me
about what she knew
about culture as an Aboriginal
woman and what she could share.
And she said that our culture
existed for 60,000 years.
And it was based on dreams,
and freedom, and this capacity
to move wherever
you needed to move.
And as long as you're in
prison, you can't dream.
And you can't be free.
And it was Pauline that really
initiated this connection--
reconnection back
with my family,
back up in North Queensland,
and meeting my grandfather
for the first time.
My grandfather is my biggest
idol, my hero, my savior,
my teacher.
And most of all, my
grandfather and dad.
>> And he's still
with you today?
>> No, he passed away, but,
yeah, he's still with me.
I mean, I was speaking
to someone earlier today.
And I said that, literally,
if I sat down and told people
how close I feel
to my grandfather,
even though he's passed,
they'll put me in the East Wing
up on the hill.
Because it's not my imagination.
I can smell him with me.
I hear him.
And it's very nurturing.
It's very guiding.
It's really-- he became
such an important figure.
And he was the first person.
He said to me on our very first
meeting when we first met--
one, he walked in the room.
I was shocked.
I'd never seen an Aboriginal
man look like my grandfather,
except in a picture book.
I was confused.
Because I was trying to base
Aboriginality on color, still.
He was a black man.
How are you my grandfather?
And my grandfather said to me
nothing, except that he said,
son, what do you want to be?
Like, you can either be another
Aboriginal kid in prison.
And you'll just be a statistic.
Or you can dream
to become somebody.
And that was it.
He left.
And then the next
day, he came in.
And he only spoke Kuku-Yalanji
to me, like he sat there.
Which as a city kid, I'd never
heard an Aboriginal person
speaking Aboriginal language.
I don't even remember
even seeing a documentary.
Instead, I have a man
sit across the table
and just speak to you.
It was haunting.
It was confusing.
It was confronting.
But it was so
mysterious as well.
And by the time I
was 16 and 9 months,
I was sort of taken
back to North Queensland
on a conditional
sentence, that if I
was-- stay with my
grandparents, that I
could sort of serve the rest
of my sentences out there.
And so I took that thing.
It was the easy option.
And it took me about
three days to realize
that I'd made a
pretty silly choice,
that pool tables and pizzas
in prison were pretty--
it was pretty easy.
We were safe in there.
We had our crew.
We had our sort of--
it wasn't that tough.
The screws were the
toughest, because they just--
there was no rehabilitation.
It was basically they
drilled into you every day.
Like you're a dog, like you're
never going to be nothing.
That was-- you heard it over
and over and over again.
>> But you chose otherwise.
>> Yeah.
Well, I think I didn't--
I made this crazy decision to
go back with my grandparents
up to North Queensland.
And I remember
getting off the plane
and driving to Mossman Gorge,
and then up through Cape
Tribulation, and then
through Woodville,
another Aboriginal community,
and up to Shiptons Flats, which
was our traditional western
(speaking Kuku Yalanji)
Youghal country.
And this sense of
being very confused,
because it felt like home.
I knew I'd never been there.
And it was making me cry.
And I hadn't cried
since Matt died, really.
And that was pretty
tough for me.
It was probably my
first cultural lesson
that I ever got with my
grandfather, is when he saw me
cry.
We went to a place--
Twin Bridges-- which is a
very special place to us.
And I got out of the car.
And I began to cry.
And my grandfather--
because our Western culture
teaches it, like that's weak.
And there's-- you wipe
your tears away as quick
as your eyes well.
And my grandfather whacked
me when-- he whacked me.
He said, why?
Don't wipe your tears away.
I asked him, what do you mean?
He said just let them fall.
Like, you wouldn't have
been given tear ducts
if you weren't meant to cry.
And then he told me a
pretty powerful story of--
one of our dreaming stories
about the rainbow serpent,
and the connection to
the lightning brothers,
and the story about
this beautiful serpent
that carved, over a
long period of time,
this incredible landscape.
And from the skies,
these lightning brothers
had watched her
carve this journey.
And at the end of
this time of credit,
she looked back across all
the land, and the mountains,
the beds, or the canyons.
And she started to cry,
because there was still
no life or color in it.
And she was yelling
and screaming.
And the brothers came
down from the sky.
And she said, I want you to
strike me with lightning.
And the boys were-- they
didn't want to do that.
Because they were just in
awe of what she created
and her beauty.
And so they returned.
And she kept
wailing and wailing,
until they finally came back.
And they struck
her with lightning.
And at that point,
the boys were worried
that it was going to kill her.
But she began to cry.
And her tears dropped.
And they were massive tears,
that the more she cried,
the rivers filled.
And the lands started to grow.
And the boys returned.
And life was created at that.
And so my grandfather
always said
that if she had wiped away her
tears, there would be no life.
There would be no
land and no love.
And it sort of
gave me permission
to cry again, which I did
a lot, and for the time
that I was with my grandfather
and from those several years
up there.
>> Those several
years that you've--
from what I've read and the
sense that I've received
is that time with
your grandfather
really started to
change your perspective,
your sense of who you were.
You connected back
into your roots.
And from that, you
have really taken
the culture, and the
history, and the teachings
of your elders.
Can you share with us
how you use that now?
>> Yeah, it really is like--
I just was with my grandfather.
I was with the old people.
I wasn't able to mix with any of
the young people, young family
members.
I was just with my grandfather,
my grandfather's brothers.
I was in such a foreign world.
But my grandfather and my
family that were there--
they rebuilt me.
It wasn't about recovery.
It was about rebuilding.
And then they taught me about
traditional healing and all
about the wisdom and
the spirituality.
And it really became my freedom.
And then the introduction of
the yigi, or the didgeridoo sort
of came when I was about--
not long after arriving 17.
And it was just so natural, the
moment I got that instrument.
It felt so real.
And not only that, was
that I was able to play it.
And when I couldn't talk about
things that were hurting me,
I was able to play it
with it in my mind,
the feelings, the emotions.
But then I was able to hear
the beauty of this instrument.
So I was able to transfer
pain into beauty.
And it really became a
great sort of wholer hope.
The didgeridoo was
wholer hope for me
that it became an
instrument that--
it was-- it grabbed me.
It was natural.
And before I knew
it, I was playing it.
And I remember being
with my grandfather
and driving out to Laura.
And I said to him,
old man, that's it.
I want to be a
didgeridoo player.
I want to play didgeridoo
in every state of Australia.
And that was my
lifelong ambition.
And I went to Cairns.
And I was playing didgeridoo
in a shop in Cairns.
And then from there,
got the opportunity
to go to-- to come to
Sydney-- back to Sydney.
And there was a cultural center.
Or it was the Northern
Territory Tourism Commission.
It was sort of a half
tourist booking center.
And then the rest was sort
of cultural and souvenirs.
But there was a theater there.
And I got the
opportunity to perform,
to start playing didgeridoo.
I initially was just
selling didgeridoos.
And what I realized
were that more people
were sitting in my
show out at the front
than going to the
show in the theater.
And before I knew it, I
had that theater to myself.
And I was so ashamed talking
on stage in front of people.
But it was--
I had to do it and three shows
a day, seven days a week.
>> So your art and your
music has been absolutely
instrumental in your
own healing journey?
>> Absolutely.
My grandfather--
like with my art,
he said, you're a
beautiful artist,
but it's getting you in trouble.
So turn your art into something
that people can love, wisdom.
Paint the stories.
You will always
remember a picture,
but you might not
remember the words.
My natural instinct
going back home
was to write down everything
that I was learning.
And my grandfather
took a book from me
and threw it in the fire.
He said, what have you learned?
I couldn't remember pretty
much what I had written.
Because I've been so
focused on trying to take
notes, that I'd
forgotten everything.
My grandfather said, so if you
spend the next couple of years
up here writing
everything down, you'll
go home and lose those books.
And you'll lose
everything with it.
And so that realization that
our culture survived, because we
just kept telling stories.
And you repeat stories, but
that's how you remember them.
And our stories change.
And they evolve with the
country, and the landscape,
and the time.
And it has been.
Music and art has been so
instrumental in healing myself.
But I had no--
I didn't have the
awareness that that's
what it was doing to myself.
>> It was just a natural--
>> It was an outlet.
It was a natural--
playing music was very
natural to me, and I loved it.
And getting that job out
in the performance hall
at the tourist commission--
someone then saw me.
I think it was the
commissioner of the Northern
Territory of
Government and asked me
if I would go on the
Territory Master, which
was this promotion of
the Northern Territory
Government, that was
running to promote
Northern Territory as
a holiday destination.
And I said yes.
And so as the didgeridoo player,
we jumped in a motor home.
And we went to every regional
town and then every city.
And about nine months
later, I was speaking
to my grandfather, an old man.
I've played didgeridoo in
every state of Australia.
What do I do now?
Because it was supposed to
take me my whole life, and it
was done.
And then I got the
opportunity to play and dance
at the Sydney Olympic Games.
And performance
became my outlet.
It became my passion,
my expression, my voice.
And then I said to my
grandfather on this same
conversation, when I told him
I don't know what to do now,
and he's-- boy, don't
ever stop dreaming.
Promise me that.
You dream whatever you want.
Have those dreams.
Old man, I'm going
to play didgeridoo
in every country
around the world.
And that became my dream.
And my girlfriend at
the time, who is now
my wife, 16 years later--
we bought a flat map of the
world and some red tacks.
And at the end of
2000, I was invited
to go to Switzerland
for the first time
to play didgeridoo
over in Switzerland.
I came home.
And I put a red
tack on Switzerland.
>> How many red tacks
are on the map so far?
>> The map fell apart.
>> Too many tacks.
I've had this incredibly
blessed life where
I've seen the entire world.
I've been to some of the most
remote, exclusive places.
I've played in
Buckingham Palace.
I've played with the symphony
orchestras in America,
and England, and Germany.
I've played in Dharamsala
for the Dalai Lama.
I was the Dalai Lama's
ambassador here in Australia.
I had my own show at the
Paris Casino in Las Vegas.
I had open shows
for Neil Diamond.
>> So a very, blessed life.
And when you look
at from where you've
come from to where you are now
and what you've experienced
along the way, in the process of
rebuilding your self-confidence
and the process of
finding who you really
were and your self-identity
again, what would
you say is the most profound
teaching from your culture
or from the elders that
really helped you re-establish
your self-confidence?
Because I know
that you work a lot
now with the youth and
the youth communities.
And so you go in
and you teach them.
>> I think it was
permission to cry,
was probably one of the most--
the biggest foundation of
this out-- not being afraid
of the emotions.
And that was very
liberating to be
able to cry and to wail, to
actually wail with the grief
and not be ashamed
of making a sound
or sobbing and not having
to wipe my nose when
it was running.
And although, I have to
remind myself still today
that you have to wipe your
nose when you've been crying,
because you end up with a
snotty mouth or whatnot.
But it really is--
there were some
several foundation.
My grandfather taught me to--
he asked me about light.
He asked me the
question of, what's
the brightest thing
you've ever seen?
And my natural answer was
the sun as most people.
My grandfather said
"kija", the moon,
because it lights
up the darkness.
And he said that's that place.
He said [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
is to understand your shadows.
You have to sit in your
shadows to find the moon.
And if you can sit in
that place of darkness
and still find light,
you'll always have hope.
It's when the light goes out.
And the light goes out when
you stop fighting the shadows
and you can accept the shadows.
Shadows exist.
There's things that--
I don't live with any regret.
There's a lot of
things that I wish
I could do to say sorry
to people that I hurt.
But they're not regrets.
It's more-- I just
wish I could say sorry.
Because I now have the capacity
to understand the trauma
that maybe I created to the
lady that was home alone
when I was robbing her
house or when I was--
and she-- the fear that
maybe she'll never get over
or the hurt when
you assault someone,
is that I would love to be able
to say sorry to every person.
But I know that's not possible.
But it's not a regret, because
it's taught me so much.
And I think the thing is that
my grandfather taught me.
He said, don't ever define
your life on the pain.
Pain can be a really
great foundation.
And it can be a great fuel
for overcoming everything.
But it's sort of like-- it's
a bit like petrol and fire,
right?
So my grandfather said
the fire is so sacred.
Now, if you put wood
on the fire, it burns.
And it'll keep you warm.
You put petrol on
it, it will burn you.
So you have to be careful
what you take to the fire,
but take the goodness.
But it was really that notion
of embracing all of the shadow
side, the darkness.
And he said something
very different
to me that all the
psychologists and counselors
I had sat with that
said, you know that rage?
You got to let it go.
You got to get over it.
You're going to get past it.
Let it go.
My grandfather
said, see that rage?
Never let it go.
Just don't ever
let it hurt anyone.
He said let it be
the thing that drives
your ambitions, your hope,
your success, your dreams.
>> It's almost as
if you're saying,
let it become your friend
and use it to direct you.
>> And it did.
It became-- there's two things
when I stand up on stage just
before.
Because I've never written
a speech, because reading
is something that I'm not
very comfortable with.
I get nervous reading.
And that's a year six
trauma from the teacher
that used to make you stand
up behind your seat and read.
And all the kids
would laugh at you,
because you're
not a good reader.
>> I know it well.
Yes.
>> Yeah.
And it still lives
with me today.
So I've never written a
speech, and I never will.
But there's two things
before I walk up the stairs,
is that I remember first.
And I connect to the
emotions of the people that
said you'll never be nothing.
And then I remember-- the
voice of my grandfather said,
you can become
anything if you're
willing to dream
and work for it.
And then I take to the stage.
And it has been the thing
that's driven my life.
Everything that I've
been able to achieve
has been based on dreams,
has been based on work hard,
and have these powerful dreams,
and be bold, courageous.
And never forget sort
of the part of you
that has been broken,
is that I think
just because the
scars are there,
like scars are sometimes
a bit of a reminder,
but it doesn't
make us who we are.
>> For sure.
And it's interesting.
Because as I was saying
right at the beginning,
we were talking outside.
And what you just said
there around never let
go of your dream.
And it's what's driven
you all of the way.
And outside you said it's
been both my greatest
gift and my greatest
enemy in the respect
that you shared outside that
you've recently experienced
again a very deep
depression that's
come over you in
the last four weeks.
>> Yeah.
I mean, it couldn't have
come at a more fitting time.
Sort of five weeks ago
now, life just crumbled.
Absolutely.
I was back up in northeast
Arnhem Land with family.
There was a big
cultural festival,
but it's sort of like a
political, cultural agenda.
And I was sort of just
listening to the political side
of things.
And it was part of my
responsibility with work.
And then I went back
to camp with family
and then danced for (speaking
Kuku-Yalanji) for a ceremony.
And I laid back in
a tent that night.
And I'd been invited
to a few campfire yurts
to tell my personal story.
So a lady in my tent that night.
And I just burst into tears.
And it was like a great mirror
being held up against me.
I was like, who have I become?
I'm now the CEO of a business,
like of an organization.
And I realized that I
achieved that status.
Well, hard work.
But it was inspired by
two people that told me
I could never do it, because--
and one lady said to me after--
I think she probably had one
glass of red wine too many
and said, it's like you're
just a spokesperson.
It's not like you're
ever going to be the CEO.
And another person
said to me, what
do you think this is
like a social experiment?
You don't know the first thing
about running a business.
Well, did you
leave school again?
And that thing that drives
my success sort of--
and the ego and
everything that's-- well,
it became this
attitude of like, well,
I turned my fingers
up to the world.
Those two people.
Well, watch me.
I'll prove you all wrong.
And then I become the CEO.
And this realization is that
it probably wasn't my dream.
It was me proving to people
that I can achieve anything
if I put my mind to it, that
the limitations of someone else
should never be the
limitations of ourself.
And sort of the ego wanted
to prove those people wrong.
But the realization was that--
and so world came crashing down.
I did two things.
I sent an email to work
and said that there
had been a tragedy
in the family,
probably not far from the truth.
And then I sent an email to
my wife-- or I called my wife,
but in a text message.
And I said that work
wanted me to go away,
which it wasn't uncommon for--
and I said, oh, we've got
to go away for China--
to China for a business meeting.
And it's not unusual.
So my wife said
yeah, no problem.
That's fine.
And what I thought
in my mind was
that I'd go away for a week.
Because I know that there
was a couple of triggers.
So that whole thing
about hating bullies--
it surfaced at Canberra Airport.
I walked to the business lounge.
And there was like a young guy.
And he was completely
bullying this young girl
behind the counter.
Because he wanted to get
on the earlier flight,
but he bought a fare
that couldn't be changed.
And he was demanding it.
And he was being horrible and
making this young girl feel.
And I said to him,
I said bud, look,
if she can't change the ticket,
she can't change the ticket.
There's no point making
her feel horrible.
And he's said to me, it's
none of your business.
I said, well, the moment I
heard you abusing this woman,
it became my business.
And he said to me,
mind your own business.
And I said to him
at that point--
and there was a
few people around,
but I'd already locked my
intent on don't bully people.
And now, I'm going to bully you.
And I said to him, I said
people like you end up
at the bottom of those
stairs in a pool of blood
with ambulance officers asking
questions on how the hell
he landed there.
And it was that
steely look, that
deathly look of hatred, like
don't disempower this woman.
And I want to make
you feel like--
I'm going to make you
feel right now how
you're making this lady feel.
And that was at a point.
And I realized that
that rage, that anger
was starting to
come back to life.
But I sort of ignored it.
And I thought, let it go.
But really, the truth was
that I was struggling.
I moved from Sydney.
I moved from Queensland
two years ago
to pursue this job with
my wife and our kids.
And I've, everyday, almost
woken up and said I hate Sydney.
And I blamed Sydney
for the turmoil that
was going on inside,
because I didn't really
want to dig inside.
Because I didn't have time.
Work, work, work, work,
achieve this thing, chase this.
And as a result, my
paints stay in the box.
My music barely comes out.
>> So what you'd found over
those two years is that you
literally hadn't picked up
a didgeridoo, hadn't drawn--
>> Yeah, no.
>> --hadn't done
any other things.
>> Still didgeridoo.
But had I played for myself?
No, I'd only played
for an audience,
which was very different.
>> You found you were losing--
>> Absolutely.
>> --contact with the
very things that--
>> That made me.
>> --kept you grounded.
>> That healed me
as a wounded man.
And what I realized was that
I was giving to everyone,
but not giving back to myself.
I'm a classic case of
the wounded healer, that
I want to fix everyone, is
that the traditional healing is
a big part of my life.
I was fortunate to
sit with those old men
and have that
knowledge taught to me.
But I wasn't doing it.
I wasn't practicing it.
And as a result, my
spirit suffocated.
And I cracked, so turmoil.
So as I said, let my wife--
I just thought, I'd
go away for seven days
and come back until work.
Family is right.
We'll get through it.
We go through this a lot.
And then I'd go home
to my wife and kids
and say China is just all right.
I'm tired.
And you know what it's like.
I'm happy to be home.
But on day four, two of
my children got sick.
One got like a croup.
And then the other one
got impetigo cold sores.
And my wife started texting me,
saying, like, I need some help.
Where are you?
And I wasn't responding.
And then her mom called her.
And said, have
you seen the news?
And she was like, no.
And she's like. turn it on.
And a typhoon was developing
off the coast of China.
And so my wife panicked
and called work.
And work said, what do you mean?
>> He's at home.
>> He's with you.
And, so you know.
But what I'd done was
I'd flown back to Sydney
from Darwin on Sunday morning--
from Arnhem Land to Darwin,
red eyed in, and then jumped
on a plane to Santiago, and
then flew to Lima, and then
from Lima to Iquitos,
and then four hours
on a dinghy up the
Amazon to the Ugwa people
who I met nine years ago.
There was only 22 of them.
No one spoke a word of English.
And I knew that I could sit
there and play didgeridoo.
And no one would ask me
questions, because we couldn't
speak each other's language.
And that's what I did.
I sat in the Amazon
for a week and thought
everything was going to be--
>> Did you get a gut
instinct that things weren't?
>> I did.
On the exact day, I was like
something's not quite right.
This intuitive-- it was
coming back to life,
because I was healing myself.
But I knew I had to
have time to myself.
Because I knew my wife
would say, come on.
Let's talk about it.
Let's get through it.
But I needed stillness.
And that was
something that my mind
hadn't been for a long time.
And so when I got back to
reception, it was at Lima.
And I turned my phone on.
It was like, beep, beep,
beep, beep, beep. beep, beep.
All these messages,
people panicking.
Where are you?
Because my wife
had called Qantas.
They couldn't give
her any details,
so she had to report
to the police.
And so what actually unfolded
was that I had to come to terms
and face the reality that now
the world knew that I was in--
my brother has been my
best friend in this.
My brother did work for
the Black Dog Institute.
But he's so blatantly
honest, right?
So when my wife called him
at midnight and said like--
he tells you everything.
Where have you been?
And he said, he told
me he's going to China.
And he said to my wife,
listen, there's two things.
He's either having an affair
or he's had a breakdown.
He's taken off bush.
I wish he hadn't have
said the affair part,
because that freaks
your wife out a bit.
But the truth of it
was I'd just taken off.
That I realized that the
rage was coming back.
And I was going to hurt
somebody or myself.
And I needed to heal
that part of me.
And so I did.
But coming home, I confronted
by the reality of the world
knew now.
The work and everyone knew.
And it was pretty dark.
It was it was painful.
But this is only five weeks ago.
I'm sitting here.
And you know again.
I went.
It's part of protocol
for work and support.
I went to a psychologist
in North Sydney,
and it drove me
absolutely insane.
Because it was a
white room that--
and she asked me
these questions.
And it had nothing to do with it
being a woman, but I was like--
>> Feeling for you is a
very different experience.
>> Absolutely.
And so I called
Clinton Schultz who's
an Aboriginal psychologist.
And he flew down to Sydney.
And we just-- he said well,
just meet in the park.
And so we sat in the
park and we just yearned.
And that was it.
We just-- I unpacked
this conversation
and realized that I had
abandoned all the things that
made me strong in
pursuit of success
in a corporate world or to
be seen as I achieved it
for someone else.
And the last four weeks that--
I've sat at home.
I've had my kids for longer,
love my wife more, and just
fed my spirit.
And in five weeks,
I've lost 13 kilos.
And I haven't done
anything different
except in the morning,
I make my coffee hot
so I can drink it slowly.
And I sit down and
eat my breakfast.
And I chew it, not swallow.
And I enjoy the food.
I don't talk on the phone
while I'm eating anymore.
Because I want to enjoy the
food that's nurturing my body.
And I've sort of
unpacked everything.
And I've dusted off
the paint brushes,
and started painting
again, and playing music,
or my instruments are out.
We spent time
walking in the bush.
I live on a beautiful property.
It had nothing to
do with Sydney.
Where I live is incredible.
My property backs onto the
Blue Mountains National Park.
it's just that I was so
busy trying to achieve this,
that I forgot to feed this.
>> So, Jeremy, that leads me
to a question if you could just
put literally, I guess the one
top thing that you would want
to remind any young child
or teenager that is off
their path.
What what's the one thing that
you would want them to remember
to help them get back on path.
In the night of the
dark soul, what's
the one thing that you
would remind somebody?
>> Is that dreams
are so critical.
Dreams are not--
I always thought dreams
were for the privileged.
But dreams are free.
And the thing is that you
can have as many dreams
as you like.
And always found that my dreams
have been my red balloon,
right?
Because I fall
every now and then.
I stumble.
But as long as I hold onto that
balloon, it lifts my hand up.
So it makes it a bit easier
to get back off the ground.
We all stumble.
Anyone that says
they don't is denying
know of an emotional path.
So to any of those young
people, have dreams
and feed your dreams.
Dreams are like plants, right?
They won't grow with no water.
And dreams grow with
love and action.
And don't let anyone
else define your dreams.
Like I said earlier, the
limitations of someone else
is their own.
It's not yours.
You don't have to
invest into that.
So I'd always say that.
Dream.
>> Dreams.
And hold your dreams
and feed your dreams.
>> Yeah.
And tell your dreams.
Because dreams are like--
and I know this is a bit
challenging for some people,
because people hear
the infectious part.
And they go, oh, infection.
That's bad.
But dreams are infectious.
So when you tell your
dream to somebody
and they see it in your eyes,
that that's what you dream,
they fall in love with it, too.
And so your dream
just got bigger.
>> Beautiful.
Beautiful.
So I have one more question.
And this is something we're
asking all of our speakers.
And that is through all of time,
the philosophers have always
said, we are what we think
and what we tell our brains,
our minds, we come to believe.
And we know that
the "I am" statement
is one of the most powerful
statements we can ever
speak to ourselves.
So if there was an "I am"
that you would wake up
to remind yourself of every
day, what would your "I am" be?
>> See, this is not a
short answer, really.
But like in our
culture, we believe
there are three brains
in the human body.
We believe like
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
in our language.
And [NON-ENGLISH]
is that instinct,
that intuitive mind
that is the biggest one.
It sits in the stomach,
the gut instinct.
But the next one
is [NON-ENGLISH],,
so the heart where you feel.
And then the interesting part--
[NON-ENGLISH] means-- the only
time you use that word is when
you're fishing net gets tangled.
It means it's no good.
And so if you drive your life
with this, it'll be tangled.
When a young child is
born into the world,
if they choose to live amongst
us in the physical world,
they take [NON-ENGLISH],, that
first conscious breath a baby
takes, that gasp.
Sometimes they need to be
smacked by the doctor to take
it, but it happens
or it doesn't.
And it's also the last
thing anyone does,
whether it's a traumatic
accident, or just old age,
or you gasp.
And it's the way
in, the way out.
It's that sacred
breath of the spirit.
And we don't-- as humans,
we've become a bit anxious.
And so we don't breathe,
our shallow breathing.
So we never give
life to our stomach.
And so that diaphragm breath.
That's the first thing
the last five weeks.
I lay in bed and
fill my diaphragm up
with life and breath and truth.
Because everything
that's here then
has to pass over the heart.
So I know what's
real and what's not.
And then the mind--
[NON-ENGLISH],, which means
tangled or no good actually
comes to life.
Because it has the
processing ability
to translate the emotions.
And that is-- my "I am"
is to breathe, right?
>> I am breath.
Beautiful.
Jeremy, thank you
so much for sharing
your amazing story,
and your wisdom,
and the wisdom of your elders.
And it's just been
an absolute pleasure.
And thank you so
much for your time.
>> Thank you.
Thank you.